.TH SETUP.SH 1 "2026-04-04" "machine-setup 2.0" "Machine Setup Manual"
.SH NAME
setup.sh \- cross-platform machine configuration and syncing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B setup.sh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Cross-platform machine setup with profile-based package management,
dotfiles synchronization via Syncthing, secrets management with git-crypt,
and automated backups with Restic.
.PP
Supports 18 platforms: Fedora, Ubuntu, Debian, Gentoo, Void Linux,
Arch Linux, Alpine Linux, NixOS, OpenSUSE, Rocky Linux, AlmaLinux,
RaspberryPiOS, macOS, FreeBSD, Windows 11, WSL2, ChromeOS, and Termux.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-profile " " \fIname\fR
Profile to use (minimal, full, or custom profile name).
Default: auto (minimal on RaspberryPiOS, full elsewhere).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-packages
Skip package installation.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dotfiles
Skip dotfile linking.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-syncthing
Skip Syncthing setup.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-backup
Skip backup setup.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show a colored diff of current vs desired state without making changes.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-profiles
List all available profiles with descriptions.
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-profile " " \fIname\fR
Show the full configuration of a profile.
.TP
.BR \-\-validate\-profile " " \fIname\fR
Validate a profile's configuration (required fields, dotfile paths,
platform config).
.TP
.BR \-\-create\-profile " " \fIname\fR
Create a new profile from a minimal template. Profile names may only
contain alphanumeric characters, hyphens, and underscores.
.TP
.B \-\-update
Pull the latest changes from the remote repository and re-run setup
with the same arguments.
.TP
.B \-\-unlink
Remove dotfile symlinks managed by the specified profile. Use with
\fB\-\-profile\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-check
Check the health of the current setup: installed commands, dotfile
symlink integrity, and service status. Use with \fB\-\-profile\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-status
Show a status dashboard with platform info, installed package versions,
dotfile link state, git-crypt status, Syncthing, backup config, and services.
.TP
.TP
.BR \-\-diff\-profiles " " \fIa\fR " " \fIb\fR
Compare two profiles, showing differences in packages and configuration.
.TP
.BR \-\-secrets " " \fIaction\fR
Manage secrets. Actions: pull, push, list, status, init, set\-provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-remote " " \fIuser@host\fR
Run setup on a remote machine via SSH. Passthrough options supported.
.TP
.BR \-\-fleet " " \fIaction\fR
Manage a fleet of machines. Actions: register, remove, list, setup, setup\-all.
.TP
.BR \-\-audit " [" \fIcount\fR "]"
Show recent audit log entries (default: 20).
.TP
.BR \-\-gpg " " \fIaction\fR
Manage GPG keys. Actions: import, export, list, status.
.TP
.B \-\-verify\-backup
Verify backup integrity and recency.
.TP
.B \-\-detect\-conflicts
Detect dotfile conflicts and broken symlinks.
.TP
.BR \-\-build\-image " " \fIprofile\fR
Build a Docker image with a profile pre-installed.
.TP
.BR \-\-serve " [" \-\-port " " \fIn\fR "]"
Start web status dashboard (default port: 8080).
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive
Launch an interactive setup wizard that guides through profile selection
and component choices.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the help message and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MACHINE_SETUP_REPO
Git repository URL. Default: https://github.com/yourusername/machine-setup.git
.TP
.B MACHINE_SETUP_DIR
Local install directory. Default: ~/.machine-setup
.TP
.B MACHINE_SETUP_CUSTOM
Custom extensions directory. Default: <repo>/custom
.SH PROFILES
.SS minimal
Essential CLI tools only. Includes: nushell, neovim, ripgrep, fd-find,
fzf, git, mise, gnupg, openssh, git-crypt, syncthing. Ideal for servers
and resource-constrained systems. Default on RaspberryPiOS.
.SS full
Complete development environment. Extends minimal with: zellij, bat, eza,
dust, bottom, procs, jq, httpie, Docker, kubectl, Python 3, Rust, and more.
Default on all other platforms.
.SS selfhosted
Self-hosted server stack. Extends minimal with Docker Compose, Tailscale,
monitoring tools, and backup utilities.
.SH CUSTOM EXTENSIONS
Place customizations in the \fBcustom/\fR directory:
.TP
.B custom/profiles/*.conf
Custom profiles (auto-discovered by \fB\-\-list\-profiles\fR).
.TP
.B custom/packages/*.conf
Extra package definitions (merged during installation).
.TP
.B custom/scripts/*.sh
Extra setup scripts (run after main setup, alphabetical order).
.TP
.B custom/dotfiles/
Extra dotfiles (mirrored to $HOME).
.SH NIXOS
NixOS users can use the Nix flake instead of setup.sh for packages:
.PP
.RS
nix develop        # minimal profile
.br
nix develop .#full # full profile
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I packages/common.conf
Universal package definitions with cross-platform name mappings.
.TP
.I packages/platforms/*.conf
Platform-specific package definitions.
.TP
.I profiles/*.conf
Profile definitions (INI format with inheritance).
.TP
.I backup/restic-config.conf
Backup configuration (encrypted with git-crypt).
.TP
.I completions/
Shell completion scripts for bash, zsh, and fish.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (missing dependencies, invalid profile, failed installation).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Auto-detect profile and run full setup:
.B setup.sh
.TP
Use minimal profile, skip backup:
.B setup.sh --profile minimal --no-backup
.TP
Preview changes without applying:
.B setup.sh --dry-run
.TP
Check health of current setup:
.B setup.sh --check --profile full
.TP
Create and use a custom profile:
.B setup.sh --create-profile mysetup
.br
.B setup.sh --profile mysetup
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR install-packages (1),
.BR link-dotfiles (1),
.BR check-health (1),
.BR status-dashboard (1),
.BR validate-profile (1),
.BR dry-run-diff (1),
.BR detect-conflicts (1),
.BR fleet-manager (1),
.BR remote-setup (1),
.BR install-completions (1),
.BR git-crypt (1),
.BR syncthing (1),
.BR restic (1),
.BR nix (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Machine Setup contributors.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/yourusername/machine-setup/issues
